{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2868
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fmodern\fcharset0 CourierNewPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue149;\red190\green48\blue5;
\red67\green67\blue67;\red26\green26\blue26;\red118\green0\blue2;\red52\green52\blue52;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgray\c0;\cspthree\c8\c0\c62300;\cspthree\c73986\c30541\c12575;
\csgray\c33333;\csgray\c13333;\cspthree\c49815\c9026\c5508;\csgray\c26667;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs39\fsmilli19925 \cf2 AER1516: Robot Motion Planning\

\fs34\fsmilli17215 Assignment #3: Autonomous Frontier-Based Exploration\

\fs28\fsmilli14346 Winter 2026\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Assignment Overview\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 This assignment is designed to provide experience with autonomous exploration and closed-loop decision-\
making for robotic systems. The assignment is due on Friday, April 3, 2026 by 11:59 p.m.. The number of\
points available are shown next to each portion of the assignment description below; there are 50 points in\
total. You will submit Python code and a PDF report (in a 
\f1 .tar 
\f0 archive).\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Frontier-Based Exploration\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 In Assignment #2 you implemented RRT and RRT* planners to solve single-query motion planning problems.\
In this assignment, you will move beyond isolated planning and build a frontier-based exploration system,\
closing the sense\'96plan\'96act loop.\
A simulated ground robot equipped with a 360\'b0 lidar sensor is placed in an unknown 2D environment. The\
robot maintains an occupancy grid that tracks which cells are free (explored, no obstacle), occupied (ex-\
plored, obstacle), or unknown (not yet observed). Your task is to implement the decision-making layer that\
autonomously drives the robot to explore the environment and maximize map coverage within a fixed time\
budget. Figure \cf3 1 \cf2 shows a snapshot of the exploration in progress on one of the provided maps.\

\fs12\fsmilli6140 Coverage: 50.5% | Time: 1.4/60s | Strategy: nearest | Step: 70\

\fs9\fsmilli4605 0\
10\
20\
30\

\fs10\fsmilli5372 y\

\fs9\fsmilli4605 40\
50\
60\
70\
0 20 40 60 80\

\fs10\fsmilli5372 x\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 Figure 1: Exploration in progress on the office map at 50% coverage. The robot (red circle) navigates toward\
frontier regions (green dots with yellow star centroids) along a planned path (blue line). Gray areas are\
unknown, white is explored free space, and black represents discovered walls.\
1 of 5
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 AER1516: Robot Motion Planning Assignment #3: Autonomous Frontier-Based Exploration\
The key concept here is the frontier: a free cell with at least one unknown neighbour. These frontiers represent\
the boundary between explored and unexplored space, as illustrated in Figure \cf3 2\cf2 . By repeatedly selecting and\
navigating to frontier regions, the robot incrementally reveals the entire map. This paradigm is widely used\
in many real-world exploration applications, including the DARPA Subterranean Challenge
\fs13\fsmilli6974 \cf3 1\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 .\

\fs8\fsmilli4349 \cf4 Frontier cells (free + unknown neighbor)\

\fs9\fsmilli4832 \cf5 Unknown\

\fs8\fsmilli4349 \cf6 Occupied\
(wall)\
\cf7 Robot\
\cf8 Free\
(explored)\

\fs7\fsmilli3866 \cf2 Free\
Occupied\
Unknown\
Frontier\
Robot\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 Figure 2: Frontier cells are free cells adjacent to at least one unknown cell, forming the boundary between\
explored and unexplored space. The robot navigates to these regions to incrementally reveal the map.\
What is Provided\
You receive a complete simulation framework so that you can focus exclusively on the exploration logic. The\
starter code includes:\
\'95 A 2D environment simulator with three test maps: an open room with pillars, a multi-room office, and\
cave-like passages.\
\'95 A raycasting-based lidar sensor model (360\'b0 field of view, 3 m range).\
\'95 An occupancy grid mapper that maintains free, occupied, and unknown cell states.\
\'95 A Dijkstra-based path planner with obstacle inflation, along with path validation utilities.\
\'95 Live visualization that shows the exploration in real time.\
\'95 A working random baseline: random frontier detection and random goal selection, fully wired into the\
exploration loop. You can run the starter code out of the box and immediately see a robot exploring\'97just\
very inefficiently.\
You do not need to implement any perception, mapping, SLAM, or low-level planning infrastructure. You\
start with a functioning (but inefficient) system and make it intelligent.\

\fs11\fsmilli5978 1
\f1\fs15\fsmilli7970 \cf3 https://www.war.gov/Multimedia/Experience/Subterranean-Challenge/\

\f0\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 2 of 5
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 AER1516: Robot Motion Planning Assignment #3: Autonomous Frontier-Based Exploration\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Your Assignment Tasks\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 Your work is contained entirely in the file 
\f1 exploration.py
\f0 . The file has clearly marked 
\f1 TODO 
\f0 sections for\
each part. The framework calls your functions automatically\'97you only need to fill in the logic.\
1. Frontier Detection and Clustering (12 points)\
Replace the random frontier detector with a proper implementation. A frontier cell is a free cell that has\
at least one unknown 4-neighbor (up, down, left, right). Your implementation should:\
\'95 Scan the occupancy grid and identify all frontier cells.\
\'95 Cluster frontier cells into contiguous frontier regions using BFS (flood-fill) with 4-connectivity. Each\
cluster represents a connected segment of the exploration boundary.\
\'95 Filter out regions with fewer than 
\f1 FRONTIER_MIN_SIZE 
\f0 cells (defined in 
\f1 config.py
\f0 , default 3).\
These tiny clusters are noise and should be discarded.\
\'95 Return a list of 
\f1 FrontierRegion 
\f0 objects, each containing the cluster cells, centroid, and size.\
Use the function template 
\f1 detect_frontiers() 
\f0 in 
\f1 exploration.py
\f0 . Guidance comments and a\
scaffolded structure are provided in the file.\
2. Goal Selection Strategies (16 points total)\
Implement two goal selection strategies to replace the random baseline.\
Part 2a: Nearest Frontier (10 points) \'97 Select the closest reachable frontier cell by path cost. For\
each frontier region whose centroid is not blacklisted, plan a path from the robot\'92s current position to\
the centroid and choose the goal with the minimum path cost. If a centroid falls on a non-free cell\
(e.g., a wall), snap it to the nearest free cell. Use the function template 
\f1 select_goal_nearest()\

\f0 in 
\f1 exploration.py
\f0 .\
Hint: Convert the robot\'92s world-coordinate position (
\f1 state.robot_x
\f0 , 
\f1 state.robot_y
\f0 ) to grid coor-\
dinates using 
\f1 CELL_SIZE
\f0 . Remember that row corresponds to y and column corresponds to x.\
Part 2b: Custom Strategy (6 points) \'97 Design and implement your own goal selection strategy that\
outperforms the nearest-frontier strategy on at least one of the provided maps. Your strategy should\
consider factors beyond pure distance. Some ideas to explore:\
\'95 Cost-utility: maximize frontier_size/path_cost, preferring large, close frontiers over small, distant ones.\
\'95 Information gain: estimate how much unknown area surrounds each frontier.\
\'95 Dead-end avoidance: penalize frontiers deep in narrow corridors.\
Use the function template 
\f1 select_goal_custom() 
\f0 in 
\f1 exploration.py
\f0 . Briefly describe your ap-\
proach in a code comment.\
3. Robust Exploration Loop (12 points)\
Implement the main decision-making callback that the framework calls once per iteration. The random\
baseline ignores many edge cases that arise during real exploration. Your implementation must handle:\
\'95 Path validation: As the robot discovers new obstacles, a previously planned path may become blocked.\
Validate the remaining path each iteration using 
\f1 validate_path() 
\f0 and clear it if invalid to trigger\
replanning.\
\'95 Goal selection and planning: When no valid path exists, call the goal selector to pick a frontier, then\
plan a path to it using 
\f1 plan_path()
\f0 .\
\'95 Blacklisting unreachable goals: If 
\f1 plan_path() 
\f0 returns 
\f1 None 
\f0 for a goal (no feasible path exists),\
add the goal to 
\f1 state.blacklisted_goals 
\f0 and try another frontier.\
3 of 5
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 AER1516: Robot Motion Planning Assignment #3: Autonomous Frontier-Based Exploration\
\'95 Completion detection: When no reachable frontiers remain, set 
\f1 state.exploration_complete\
= True 
\f0 to signal the framework to stop.\
Use the function template 
\f1 exploration_step() 
\f0 in 
\f1 exploration.py
\f0 . When you find a valid path,\
set 
\f1 state.current_path 
\f0 and 
\f1 state.current_path_index = 1 
\f0 (skip the start cell, which is the\
robot\'92s current position). The framework then executes the path automatically.\
Optional Bonus: A* Path Planning\
The provided path planner in 
\f1 planner.py 
\f0 uses Dijkstra\'92s algorithm, which is correct but explores cells uni-\
formly in all directions. For distant goals, Dijkstra wastes significant wall-clock time expanding unnecessary\
cells. You can upgrade the planner to A* by adding an admissible heuristic (e.g., Euclidean distance to goal)\
to the priority queue\'97the only change is replacing priority= g(n) with priority= g(n) + h(n). This does\
not change path quality (A* finds the same optimal path as Dijkstra), but makes planning dramatically faster.\
This upgrade is optional and not separately graded, but it is strongly recommended, as a slow planner eats\
into your time budget. Use the function template 
\f1 plan_path() 
\f0 in 
\f1 exploration.py
\f0 .\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Report Requirements\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 In addition to your code, submit a short PDF report (
\f1 report.pdf
\f0 ) worth 10 points. The report should\
contain:\
1. Coverage plots (5 points) \'97 For each of the three provided maps, plot coverage (%) versus time or step\
count, comparing the random baseline, nearest-frontier, and your custom strategy. You can collect data\
by running your implementation with different 
\f1 --strategy 
\f0 flags and recording the coverage history.\
2. Discussion (5 points) \'97 Briefly discuss your findings. Why do certain strategies perform better on cer-\
tain maps? Where does the greedy nearest-frontier approach struggle? What does your custom strategy\
capture that nearest-frontier misses? Keep the discussion concise, a few paragraphs is sufficient.\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Getting Started\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 Run the exploration with the random baseline to see the framework in action:\

\f1 python run_exploration.py --map open_room --strategy random\

\f0 Once you implement your strategies, test them with:\

\f1 python run_exploration.py --map office --strategy nearest\

\f0 Available options:\
\'95 Maps: 
\f1 open_room
\f0 , 
\f1 office
\f0 , 
\f1 cave\

\f0 \'95 Strategies: 
\f1 random 
\f0 (baseline), 
\f1 nearest 
\f0 (your Part 2a), 
\f1 custom 
\f0 (your Part 2b)\
\'95 Visualization speed: 
\f1 --speed 0.01 
\f0 (fast) or 
\f1 --speed 0.1 
\f0 (slow)\
\'95 No visualization: 
\f1 --no-vis 
\f0 (useful for collecting timing data)\
\'95 Reproducibility: 
\f1 --seed 42 
\f0 (fix the random seed)\
A validation script is included. Run 
\f1 python validate_submission.py 
\f0 to check that your 
\f1 exploration.py\

\f0 file imports correctly, has all required functions, and passes basic sanity checks. The code scripts are self-\
explanatory, so we encourage you to read through them to understand exactly what is being checked.\
4 of 5
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\fs19\fsmilli9963 \cf2 AER1516: Robot Motion Planning Assignment #3: Autonomous Frontier-Based Exploration\

\fs23\fsmilli11955 Submission and Grading\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 You must write your own code using Python 3.10 (or later) and NumPy 1.18.0 (or later). If your code does\
not run, we will be unable to test it. To submit your code, put it in a 
\f1 .tar 
\f0 file with this command:\

\f1 tar cvf handin.tar exploration.py report.pdf\

\f0 You may then upload your 
\f1 .tar 
\f0 file through Quercus. Note that only the above two files should be in-\
cluded in the archive. Do not modify or include any framework files (
\f1 planner.py
\f0 , 
\f1 simulator.py
\f0 ,\

\f1 run_exploration.py
\f0 , etc.)\'97we will use our own copies of these during grading.\
Grading Breakdown\
Component Points Method\
Frontier detection and clustering 12 Auto\
Goal selection: nearest frontier 10 Auto\
Goal selection: custom strategy 6 Auto\
Robust exploration loop 12 Auto\
Code subtotal 40 Auto\
Report: coverage plots and discussion 10 Manual\
Total 50\
Automated Testing\
We will run a variety of automated tests to check the operation of your code. Each map has a wall-clock time\
limit a minimum coverage threshold for the nearest-frontier strategy, shown below. Your exploration must\
achieve at least the listed coverage within these limits.\
Map Time Limit Min. Coverage (Nearest)\
open_room 30 s 75%\
office 60 s 60%\
cave 60 s 55%\
For the custom strategy (Part 2b), your implementation must achieve higher coverage than the nearest-frontier\
strategy on at least one of the provided maps.\
Passing all checks in the validation script is necessary but not sufficient for full marks \'97the automated\
grading system uses additional test cases, including one more additional map not provided in the starter code,\
to ensure your implementation generalizes. Do not hard-code behavior for specific maps.\
Grading criteria also include: correctness and succinctness of the implementation of your functions, proper\
overall program operation, and code commenting. Code that is not properly commented or that looks like\
\'91spaghetti\'92 may result in an overall deduction of up to 10%.\
5 of 5}